# Software Development Plan

## Phase 0: Requirements Analysis (tag name `analyzed`)
*(20% of your effort)*

**Important - do not change the code in this phase**

Deliver:

*   [X] Re-write the instructions in your own words.
    *   If you don't do this, you won't know what you're supposed to do!
    *   Don't leave out details!
## Rewrite the instructions
* My job with this assignment is to refactor a program that has already been made and that already works. The output
is as expected already, and there's nothing with it that I need to fix; the program is sloppily written, however, so it
is my job to fix that and make it easier to read and understand. As part of that, I need to separate the code into
6 different modules, each one being:
	* main.py
	* FractalInformation.py
	* Mandelbrot.py
	* Phoenix.py
	* Palette.py
	* ImagePainter.py
* In addition to separating the code, I need to identify code smells that are contained
in the program. With each code smell, I need to document it, explain why it's not good,
and describe how I will fix it. 
* Both of these tasks are intended to help improve the general readability of the program.
At the end of the day, that is the main goal of this assignment.
	* Some other practices that will help me achieve this goal will be running
	tests constantly to ensure that I haven't accidentally added a bug to the code.
	Every time that I make a change, I should run the program to make sure that
	nothing was affected by my change.
	* Another specific change that I've been asked to make is uniting the mandelbrot
	and phoenix dictionaries into a single dictionary.
* It also falls into my responsibility to draw a new UML Class Diagram representing
the modules that I will be separating the code into. This should mimic an actual class
diagram while getting the point across.
* Finally, I need to write a user's manual explaining how to use this program. I don't
expect this to be difficult at all, but I just need to remember to do it. 


*   [X] Explain the problem this program aims to solve.
    *   Describe what a *good* solution looks like.
    *   List what you already know how to do.
    *   Point out any challenges that you can foresee.
## Explain the problem this program aims to solve
* This program already does what it's supposed to do, but it's sloppily written and
difficult to understand. Its smelliness is the problem at hand, and that is what
must be fixed. It needs to change from smelly to refreshing.
### Describe what a *good* solution looks like.
* A good solution will follow the project requirements with regards to how to separate
the code. At the end of the day, the program should be comprised of six modules with
each module performing its own task. Any dead or redundant code will be removed, magic
numbers will be identified and replaced with global variables, and functions that perform
more than one task will be separated. Once the code is refactored, everything should
still work exactly the same; there should be no differences before and after.
### What I already know how to do
* I learned how dictionaries work because of previous assignments, so I feel
confident in my ability to combine the two dictionaries into one.
* I know how to identify code smells and what to look for, so I don't expect it to be
too difficult completing that aspect of the assignment.
* I can work with sys.argv to find the number of arguments in a command and run
the program according to those arguments.
* I know how to run the program; this will make it very easy to write the user's
manual for this program.
### Challenges that I can foresee
* In the past I've struggled properly separating code into modules. I do expect it
to take some time to really figure out what code goes where and what to import into
other modules so that the program will keep working.
* Separating functions that do too much into smaller functions. I think I'll have a 
hard time determing if a function even does have multiple roles and then separating 
it so that those roles stay separate.
* I expect it to be difficult just understanding how the code works. I'll need to take
my time reading it and playing around with it before I'll feel ready to start changing
how it's written. 
* I still don't really understand UML Diagrams, so I'll need to take time and get it
made well before the due date so that I can get help with it.
* I don't feel comfortable with tkinter, so I'm going to need to take some time to familiarize
myself with that and how it works. 

*   [X] List all of the data that is used by the program, making note of where it comes from.
    *   Explain what form the output will take.
## List all the data to be used by the program
* Nearly all of the data used in the program will already be provided by the program. 
The only data that is provided by the user is when the user inputs which fractal
the user would like to see. This data is pulled in by sys.argv and incorporated
into the program. 
* The program uses a predefined list of colors that gets called on to draw the
fractals.
* Dictionaries are used by phoenix.py and mandelbrot.py as means of knowing which
fractal to draw when the input is provided by the user.
* Calculations are used within the program to determine the difference between phoenix
and mandelbrot fractals. These numbers are provided by the programmer and never 
introduced to the user.
* The program relies on complex numbers to draw the fractals. These complex numbers
are computed within the program and require no further work to function.
* Tkinter takes each pixel and colors it according to the iteration count (phoenix 
or mandelbrot). The color comes from the aforementioned list of colors.
### Form of the output
* The output for this program is quite simple. Depending on the fractal that the user
selects, tkinter opens another window and produces an image that represents the 
selected fractal. A png image is saved to the directory from where the user ran the
program.
* The terminal prints out the continues status of the progress of the image until
the image is completed. The user is then told to exit out of the tkinter window in
order for the program to finish running.

*   [X] List the algorithms that will be used (but don't write them yet).
## List of algorithms to be used
* a function to get a color from the palette (list of colors)
* a function to return the fractal from a dictionary
* a function that will take a fractal and paint an image of it
* a function that will take the sys.argv arguments and run the program according
to the user.
* a function that will act as the main driver for the entire program.

*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `analyzed`
    *   *Grace Points: if this tag is pushed by midnight on the Sunday before the due date, you will receive up to 5 points back*


## Phase 1: Design (tag name `designed`)
*(30% of your effort)*

**Important - do not change the code in this phase**

Deliver:

*   [X] Function signatures that include:
    *   Descriptive names.
    *   Parameter lists.
    *   Documentation strings that explain its purpose and types of inputs and outputs.
## Mandelbrot and Phoenix Functions
* Since both of these functions return an interation count, they will both have the same name.
The only difference is how they calculate that iteration count, though they are quite similar

* def returnCount(coordinate) (for both):
    * 'coordinate' is the complex(x,y) coordinate
    * this function will take the complex coordinate (simply as x and y) as input and obtain its z-value through each iteration in a loop with the range being equal to the length of the respective color pallete
    * if the absolute value of 'z' is ever greater than 2, then the function will return the iteration value of that specfic instance
    * the only input that this function ever receives is in the parameter
        * the parameter MUST be a complex coordinate; otherwise the program will not work
    * The output for this function is simply an integer
        * This integer will be used by other functions in determining the color of the pixel at the coordinates where the absolute value of 'z' was greater than 2
    * Without this function, there is no way of knowing what color a specific pixel should be


*   [X] Pseudocode that captures how each function works.
    *   Pseudocode != source code.  Do not paste your finished source code into this part of the plan.

## Phoenix returnCount
* def returnCount(coordinate):
    set z equal to the complex, flipped version of the coordinate parameter (x becomes imaginary and y becomes real)
    for i in range of the length of the phoenix pallete:
        save the previous value of z
        compute the new value of z
        if the absolute value of z is greater than 2:
            return the iteration count (i)

## Mandelbrot returnCount
* def returnCount(coordinate):
    set z equal to complex(0,0) (its starting position)
    for i in the range of the length of the mandelbrot pallete:
        compute the new value of z
        if the absolute value of z is greater than 2:
            return the iteration count (i)


*   Explain what happens in the face of good and bad input.
    *   Write a few specific examples that occur to you, and use them later when testing
### In the face of good input
* Assuming that all goes well, this function will draw out the fractal as requested by the user. It will know what
to do with what information and act accordingly to that.
### In the face of bad input
* The good thing about this program is that it takes very little input from the user. All of the data necessary to make this program runs comes from the inside already. It's very easy to make sure that once there is good input the input stays that way, but that's also the case for the bad input. If I were to input an invalid paramter for where a coordinate would go, I'm not sure if the program would crash, but it certainly wouldn't appear how it's supposed to. The same goes for if one of the constants accidentally gets changed into something else. I don't think the program would crash, but it definitely wouldn't work how it's supposed to. Either way, I'll surely be trying every possible input to learn more about how this program works.

*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `designed`
    *   *Grace Points: if this tag is pushed by midnight on the Sunday before the due date, you will receive up to 5 points back*


## Phase 2: Implementation (tag name `implemented`)
*(15% of your effort)*

**Finally, you can write code!**

Deliver:

*   [X] More or less working code.
*   [X] Note any relevant and interesting events that happened while you wrote the code.
    *   e.g. things you learned, things that didn't go according to plan
## Interesting things that happened
* I'd say that the biggest thing that happened while I was implementing the code was the realization of how the code worked. I could not tell you how the math works or how my iteration count returns the right number, but I know that it does! I was also surprised that although the Mandelbrot and Phoenix functions looked different, after cleaning up the code a bit, the functions were nearly exactly the same. That was a rather pleasant, though not unexpected, surpise.
* I was caught off guard, however, by how much code I had to put into the ImagePainter.py module. I was expecting that to be relatively short, but by the end, I had put most of the actual code into that module; the painting, obtaining colors, loading, and more was all done inside ImagePainter. Though, I can't say I'm surprised now that I look back.
* I also was surprised by how simple it was to finish the Mandelbrot.py, Phoenix.py, Palette.py, and FractalInformation.py. It was easy to sort through the code easily decide what goes where. The only trouble I had figuring out was mostly between main and ImagePainter. That definitely took me the longest, as I ran a couple tests after every little change that I made.
* As I was implementing my design and refactoring the code, I quickly realized that my UML diagram wouldn't be very accurate of what I needed to do. After all the implementation, I had to update my UML diagram to look like what I had written.

*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `implemented`


## Phase 3: Testing and Debugging (tag name `tested`)
*(30% of your effort)*

Deliver:

*   [X] A set of test cases that you have personally run on your computer.
    *   Include a description of what happened for each test case.
    *   For any bugs discovered, describe their cause and remedy.
    *   Write your test cases in plain language such that a non-coder could run them and replicate your experience.
## Test cases and bugs
* I think one of the scariest bugs that I ran into on this assignment was a tKinter error. Whenever I tried making a Phoenix image just to see where I was at, I received an error from tK saying that it was trying to open an image that didn't exist. I had no idea what to do with is. I copied my code into chatGPT to see if I could get any help, but alas my attempts were in vain. After spending a good amount of time examining the code, I realized that my main driver was initializing two tK()'s -- one in the main.py module and another in ImagePainter.py. After deleting the one in main (because main runs ImagePainter), the problem was solved, and it drew the picture.
* Related to the above bug, once I got the image to appear, I noticed that for all of the Phoenix fractals, it was just a black screen: there was no color of any kind. This left me confused because I wasn't having the same problem with creating a Mandelbrot fractal. After comparing the two functions, I realized that although makeFractalPhoenix was calling the iterationCount (and the iterationCount function was working properly), I wasn't using the returned value as an index of the corresponding palette; the code was trying to parse a number instead of a color. After specifying that I wanted the return value to be the index of the palette, the images all drew.
* Near the end of the refactoring, I noticed that whenever I printed out an image, it would disappear immediately after finishing rather than stay on the screen until the user exited out. At first, I tried returning the image at the end of the makeImage function, but that didn't work either. I then noticed that mainloop() was still in main.py. After I moved this to the end of the makeImage function in ImagePainter, the image stayed on the screen until the user exited out.
* One funny bug that I discovered was that whenever I printed the 'phoenix' fractal, it would print out, but it didn't print out like it should have; the design itself was inside a circle, and everything outside the circle was a blue color. I was thrown for a loop from this because none of the other Phoenix fractals (or even Mandelbrot) had this problem. It was just 'phoenix'. I traced the problem to ImagePainter.py in the makePhoenixFractal function. In the spot where it was supposed to find the color in the palette from an index, I had written a '-1' to the return value. I don't know why I did that. But after removing the '-1' and letting the return value be exactly what the iterationCount function returned, the 'phoenix' fractal was drawn perfeclty.
* It did take a few attempts to get the unit tests right. Often whenever there was an error, it was because I had updated the name and/or parameters of a function without updating it in the unit test. It was an easy fix just updatin the unit tests. 
* Another bug that I ran into with regards to the output of the picture was where the Phoenix fractals didn't print out like they were supposed to. They still looked really cool when they printed, but it wasn't the expected output. I knew that this was because of the countIteration function. To fix this, I simply copy and pasted the original code into place, and every time I deleted or changed something, I ran the program to make sure it worked. Once I had cleaned all that I could, the program still functioned properly.
* Once I was certain that everything was finished, I ran all the unit tests, and everything came up clear. Thank goodness for that.
    * I also printed out each fractal and then compared each one to the original using the 'cmp' commmand. As expected, the command printed out nothing, meaning that each image perfectly matched its original counterpart.

*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `tested`


## Phase 4: Deployment (tag name `deployed`)
*(5% of your effort)*

Deliver:

*   [ ] Tag the last commit in this phase `deployed`
*   [ ] Your repository is pushed to GitLab.
*   [ ] **Verify** that your final commit was received by browsing to its project page on GitLab.
    *   Ensure the project's URL is correct.
    *   Review the project to ensure that all required files are present and in correct locations.
    *   Check that unwanted files have not been included.
    *   Make any final touches to documentation, including the Sprint Signature and this Plan.
*   [ ] **Validate** that your submission is complete and correct by cloning it to a new location on your computer and re-running it.
	*	Run your program from the command line so you can see how it will behave when your grader runs it.  **Running it in PyCharm is not good enough!**
    *   Run through your test cases to avoid nasty surprises.
    *   Check that your documentation files are all present.


## Phase 5: Maintenance

Spend a few minutes writing thoughtful answers to these questions.  They are meant to make you think about the long-term consequences of choices you made in this project.

Deliver:

*   [ ] Write brief and honest answers to these questions:
    *   What parts of your program are sloppily written and hard to understand?
        *   Are there parts of your program which you aren't quite sure how/why they work?
        *   If a bug is reported in a few months, how long would it take you to find the cause?
    *   Will your documentation make sense to...
        *   ...anybody besides yourself?
        *   ...yourself in six month's time?
    *   How easy will it be to add a new feature to this program in a year?
    *   Will your program continue to work after upgrading...
        *   ...your computer's hardware?
        *   ...the operating system?
        *   ...to the next version of Python?
*   [ ] Make one final commit and push your **completed** Software Development Plan to GitLab.
*   [ ] Respond to the **Assignment Reflection Survey** on Canvas.
