# Software Development Plan

## Phase 0: Requirements Analysis (tag name `5.1-analyzed`)
*(20% of your effort)*

**Important - do not change the code in this phase**

Deliver:

*   [X] Re-write the instructions in your own words.
    *   If you don't do this, you won't know what you're supposed to do!
    *   Don't leave out details!
## Rewrite the instructions
    * The goal of this assignment is to create a fractal-imaging program that takes its data from files rather than hard-coded data. In this sense, it's more flexible than the previous assignment. It's also supposed to provide at least four different fractal types/classes (the typing is based off the iteration count) as well as at least two palette sublasses derived from a Palette absstract class. This will allow the program to create more complex fractals. In terms of program requirements, the code will consist of a variety of classes and functions:
        * A Fractal abstract class with at least four concrete Fractal sublcasses
        * A FractalFactory function (inside its own module) that returns a Fractal object based off a configuration file
        * A FractalParser function (inside its own module) that reads a file from the command line and returns the configuration file to be used by FractalFactory
            * This module will also have a function that safely converts data types into the data types needed by FractalFactory to create a fractal
        * A Palette abstract class with at least two concrete subclasses
            * At least one must be dynamically generated at runtime
        * a FaletteFactory module with a function that returns a Palette object
        * An ImagePainter class that takes the product of FractalFactory, PaletteFactory, and FractalParser as input and creates an instance of ImagePainter
        * main.py where the commands are given and an ImagePainter object is made
    * I'm also supposed to be as specific as I can with any error messages, making note of where the program failed and alerting the user about it.
    * Nothing about the program should be hardcoded. It should get all of its information from the files provided by the user
        * The only exception to this is if the user doesn't provide a file or a fractal name. In this case, there is a default fractal that will be hardcoded and printed out.


*   [X] Explain the problem this program aims to solve.
## What this program aims to solve
    * The purpose of this program is to be able to print out a fractal image based off a file of fractal information that is provided by the user. Unlike the 5.0 assignment, none of the information is hardcoded into the program (with the exception of a default fractal). It should be able to take any configuration, provided that it has the right information.

    *   Describe what a *good* solution looks like.
### A good solution
    * A good solution for this assignment is a program whose modules/classes are clearly defined and clearly separated. Some modules don't need to know what's going on in other ones, so it will be important to write the code properly so that there are no unncecessary steps. Each module has one purpose and each one achieves that purpose with only the required information. A good solution also smoothly handles errors. There are a lot of places where things could go wrong, so it's important that the program account for each way an error could occur and provide enough information about the error so that the user will know what went wrong and how to fix it.

    *   List what you already know how to do.
### What I already know how to do
    * I feel comfortable using classes and initializing objects, so I'm not to worried about that aspect of the assignment
    * I know how to make for Fractal subclasses by changing the count iteration functions
    * From assignment 5.0, I know how a Fractal is actually made using tKinter
    * I understand the role that Palettes play in the process of making a Fractal image 

    *   Point out any challenges that you can foresee.
### Challenges I can forsee
    * There are a lot of moving parts, so I think that it'll take some time to get the program to actually work and then optimize it
    * I don't yet understand how to make a dynamic Palette by importing 'Colour'
    * Because there are so many ways for the program to go wrong, it will be difficult accounting for every error that the user could make. I will have to be thorough in this step.
    * Even though I've done several assignments where I've had to read a file provided by the user, I just know I'll need some time to figure that out and make sure my program reads it like it's supposed to.


*   [X] List all of the data that is used by the program, making note of where it comes from.
### Data used by the program
    * Almost all of the data should come from a file provided by the user. This file will have all the fractal configuration data (the name, type, center x and y, axis length, pixels, iterations, and an optional creal value). The program will know what to do with that information. It will have functions to provide the iteration count for the fractal types, and then the program will have the color palettes that are chosen by the user. This is all the data that will be used in the program.

    *   Explain what form the output will take.
### Form of the output
    * The output will be an tKinter image of a fractal. The program will also print a progress bar to the terminal as well as the name of the file that it's saving the image to. If an error occurs, details of the error will be pritned out to the user.


*   [X] List the algorithms that will be used (but don't write them yet).
## Algorithms that will be used
    * Each fractal class will have a function that returns the iteration count of a fractal
    * FractalFactory will need a function to read the fractal configuration data and return a Fractal as a result
    * FractalParser will need a funtion to read a file and save certain data while ignoring other data
        * There will also be a function that converts data types into other data types
    * At least one of the Palettle classes will need a function to generate the Palette and runtime
        * All Palette classes will need a function to return a string at a specified index
    * PaletteFactory will need a function to instantiate a Palette object
    * ImagePainter will need a function to take the data provided some of the other classes/modules and then make an image based off that data
    * main.py will need functions to read the command line and act accordingly
    * Each module will need to include room for wherever any errors could occur.


*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `analyzed`
    *   *Grace Points: if this tag is pushed by midnight on the Sunday before the due date, you will receive up to 5 points back*


## Phase 1: Design (tag name `5.1-designed`)
*(30% of your effort)*

**Important - do not change the code in this phase**

Deliver:

*   [X] Function signatures that include:
    *   Descriptive names.
    *   Parameter lists.
    *   Documentation strings that explain its purpose and types of inputs and outputs.
## Function signatures

* class Fractal:
    def count(coordinate, max_iter):
        The Fractal class is the main abstract class that all the other Fractals are derived from. Every Fractal needs its own count method, so this one should be left blank to make sure that each Fractal overrides it. 'coordinate' is a number on the complex plane, and 'max_iter' (type int) is the maximum number of iterations the function should run. The function will return the number of iterations necessary generate a value greater than 2.0 OR the max_iter if this condition is never met. This return value will also be returned as an integer. Every subclass of Fractal will have the same function purpose and parameters.


* class Phoenix(Fractal):
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        see 'class Fractal'

* class Mandelbrot(Fractal):
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        see 'class Fractal'

* class Julia(Fractal):
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        see 'class Fractal'

* class Spider(Fractal):
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        see 'class Fractal'

* class BurningShip(Fractal):
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        see 'class Fractal'    

* def makeFractal(fractalInfo):
    This function belongs in its own module that will be called 'FractalFactory'. It's purpose is to instantiate a Fractal object based on fractalInfo, or the fractal configuration data. 'fractalInfo' is obtained on the command line from the user. This function takes that data and returns one of the Fractal subclasses. If 'fractalInfo' is not provided, then makeFractal produces a default Fractal with hard-coded data.

* def fractalParser(fracFile):
    This function takes the fractal configuration file ('fracFile') from the command line and parses it for information, storing the important elements into a dictionary. Before it stores each piece of data, it safely converts it from a string to the necessary type. This dictionary is what is then used by makeFractal.

* class Palette:
    def getColor(n):
        This is the Palette abstract class. All other Palette classes will be derived from this class, and each subclass will need to define its own getColor method. 'getColor' will take an intenger (n) and return its corresponding list index. This return value will be a string of a color written in hex form.

* class Dynamic(Palette):
    see 'class Palette'
    This will be a Palette that is dynamically generated using the 'Colour' module.

* class Static(Palette)
    see 'class Palette'
    This will be a predefined list of colors

* class ImagePainter:
    This class takes the products of FractalFactory, PaletteFactory, and FractalParser to print out a Fractal image


*   [X] Pseudocode that captures how each function works.
    *   Pseudocode != source code.  Do not paste your finished source code into this part of the plan.
## Pseudocode

```
class Phoenix:
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        set the c and phoenix constants to their values
        set the previous value of 'z' to (0,0j)
        flip the imaginary and real parts of the 'coordinates'
        for i in range of max_iter
            compute the new value of z
            if the value is greater than 2.0: return i
        return max_iter
```
```
class Mandelbrot:
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        set z equal to (0,0j)
        for i in range of max_iter:
            compute the new value of z
            if the value is greater than 2.0: return i
        return max_iter
```
```
class Julia:
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        set z to a point on the complex plain
        c is set to an arbitrary complex number and will remain unchanged
        for i in range of max_iter:
            compute the new value of z
            if the new value is greater than 2.0: return i
        return i
```
```
class Spider:
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        c is initialized to a point on the complex plane
        set z equal to (0,0j)
            for i in range of max_iter:
                update z
                update c
                if z is greater than 2.0: return i
            return i
```
```
class BurningShip:
    def count(coordinates, max_iter):
        c is a point on the complex plane
        set z equal to (0,0j)
        for i in range of max_iter:
            update the new z value
            if z is greater than 2.0: return i
        return i
```
```
def makeFractal(fracalInfo):
    if there is fractalInfo:
        instantiate a Fractal object based on the fractalInfo
    else:
        instantiate a default Fractal object
```
```
def fractalParser(fracFile):
    create an empty dictionary
    open the file given in the command line
    read the file on line at a time
    ignore any lines that are blank or have #'s in them
    when a valid line is read, separate into two parts; make the word the key and convert the other part into its corresponding data type as the key's value
    Once the file is done being read, close it.
    Return the dictionary
```
```
def getColor(n):
    return the value of the list at index 'n'
```


*   Explain what happens in the face of good and bad input.
    *   Write a few specific examples that occur to you, and use them later when testing
## In the face of good and bad input
* In the event that everything runs perfectly, the program will print out a picture of whatever fractal the user gave in the command line argument. Each function will work as it should, and we would see polymorphism in action. The image would print out, and then wait for the user to close it once it finished printing. If the user does not provide any input, then the function will still work. It will simply produce a default fractal, but that will not change anything about how the program runs.
* If the program encounters faulty data at any part of the process, then it will crash, but it will provide an error message as specific as can be. For example, if the fractalParser method stored an invalid piece of information for a fractal, the program will crash and point the user towards that specific piece of information that made the program crash.
    * I will want to test this for every piece of the fractalParser to make sure that every error messasge prints out as it should. I will also provide the name of a Palette without a file to make sure that the program crashes, which is what it should do.

*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `designed`
    *   *Grace Points: if this tag is pushed by midnight on the Sunday before the due date, you will receive up to 5 points back*


## Phase 2: Implementation (tag name `5.1-implemented`)
*(15% of your effort)*

**Finally, you can write code!**

Deliver:

*   [X] More or less working code.
*   [X] Note any relevant and interesting events that happened while you wrote the code.
    *   e.g. things you learned, things that didn't go according to plan
## Interesting events
* I'd say the most interesting thing that happened while I was writing the code was how much I ended up deviating from my original design. Usually, when a requirement says that you 'may' do something, I see that as a suggestion that I shouldn't do it; however, for this assignment, I found that I did end up adding two things that were originally viewed as 'may' (adding extra data members into the Palette and Fractal classes)
* One thing that didn't quite go according to plan was the Palette module. Originally, I thought it would be easiest to have a hard-coded subclass Palette and then have one that was dynamically generated at run time. I wanted the satic palette to be big enough to cover any number of iterations, however, and I quickly discovered that hard-coding such a palette was going to be easier said than done. So, I instead just made two dynamic palettes, and honestly I enjoyed playing around with the colors to see what worked and what didn't work. I was also pleased with the final result because each one could be used with any number of iterations and the program would have calculated the proper amount of colors needed in each Palette.
* One funny thing that I noticed was that when I was testing some of the fractal configuration files some of the pictures were actually too big for my screen. At first I was a little concerned because I didn't know why only half the fractal was printing, but then I realized that the whole thing was being printed; I just couldn't see it all.
* Something else that happened was that once I was able to print out fractals, there was always just a sliver of black (my background color) along the right and bottom sides of the windows. I could not figure out why, so I just added 2 more pixels to the width and height of the image and bam, problem solved.
*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `implemented`

## A note for the graders
In my Fractal module, I have a Fractal subclass called 'Ryan'. This is my very own Fractal (and it looks pretty cool tbh). I have one file for it called "ryan.frac", and it's also the default Fractal that gets produced when no arguments are provided. Just fyi!


## Phase 3: Testing and Debugging (tag name `5.1-tested`)
*(30% of your effort)*

Deliver:

*   [X] A set of test cases that you have personally run on your computer.
    *   Include a description of what happened for each test case.
    *   For any bugs discovered, describe their cause and remedy.
    *   Write your test cases in plain language such that a non-coder could run them and replicate your experience.
## Phase 3 test cases
* One of the first bugs that I ran into was with the Palette class. Whenever I ran getColor(n) with n being a number that should've been well within the Palette index, it returned an out of index error. Puzzled, I looked a little closer at my code, and I realized that I was appending a list of colors (the range_to() method) to a previously defined list. Although I did have the correct amount of colors, the entire length of the array was only 1 because all of the colors were in their own array. To fix this, I simply set the previously defined array equal to the outcome of the range_to() method rather than appending the range_to() to the array. That solved the problem.
* Another bug that I ran into with the Palette class was where the program would crash on a select few arrays due to an out of index error. This didn't make sense to me because I thought that each Palette was dynamically generating the correct number of colors. After looking into it, I noticed that since I was using integer division, my Palettes would generate a lesser number of colors than what was required. To fix this, I added a simple '+2' after each integer division to make sure that colors weren't lost.
* Once everything was working as well as I hoped, I tried running one of the BurningShip fractals only to discover that it printed out a giant cirlce and nothing more. I was perplexed, for all of my other fractals printed properly. It was taking a long time to print out the circle, so I knew that it was working hard, but I couldn't figure out why it wasn't doing more. I figured that the only problem could be with the count() function, so I asked ChatGPT to take a look at it and see what was wrong. ChatGPT rewrote the function so that it would work (more specficially, it changed how I was calculating the 'z' value). Once I implemented the new 'z' calculation, the function worked as expected.
* There were a few times where I ran into an error stating that I had only provided two of the three arguments for creating a Fractal object. This was because some of the Fractals require a 'c' argument while others do not. To fix this, I had to find every reference to one of the 'c' fractals and change its initializer to include the 'c' argument. I also had to make sure that every instantiation of a 'c' fractal included a 'c' argument. After making sure that every instance included the 'c' paramter, those Fractals all printed properly.
    * One specific issue that I had with this was with BurningShip. There is a Julia variant of BurningShip, but I did not decide to include it in my program. However, all of the BurningShip configuration files contain a 'c' value (a value that is not used in the actual equation). Because of the way my code is written, I needed to leave in that 'c' argument in the BurningShip initializer to prevent the program from crashing. It's not technically used, but it causes more trouble to take it out than it does to leave it in.
* Another headache of a bug to fix was all the logic to trace an error in a file to its exact location. This took a lot of if-else statements, and every time I changed part of the logic, I rechecked everything against the invalid file. To test this, I rotated commenting out troublesome pieces of code so that every error in the file had a chance to be caught by its logic counterpart.
    * As part of my logic tree, I added in statements to make sure that a given value was actually a number and not just a string of nonsense. I used the 'isdigit()' method to check this. However, I quickly discovered that 'isdigit()' did not work on floating point numbers. Upon doing some researh, I discovered that this is because the program doesn't register the decimal point as a digit and consequently fails the test. I tried searching for other methods to use, but in the end I had to define my own function that would check if the string could be safely converted to a floating point number (but it didn't actually convert it). If it were possible, then the function would return true and false otherwise. This fixed the problem. 
* Once I felt that everything was done, I tested a fair amount of the fractal files just to make sure that at least something printed out. With each one that I tested, I confirmed that the image that was printed out relatively matched the corresponding .png file. The only differences were that of color and the issue of my screen not being large enough to see the complete images. However, I'm satisfied with the results.
* I did have to change my unit tests a bit, but when I was testing my 'count()' functions, I realized that I had no way of knowing what the actual count iterations should be. To help with this, I asked ChatGPT to read over my functions and partial tests and finish designing the tests so that they would be accurate. Once ChatGPT gave me the results, I plugged them into my unit tests and discovered that they worked. My other unit tests testing the length of the palettes and accuracy of the FractalParser also worked without any problems.
* Another bug that I ran into had to do with 'creal' and 'cimag' in the dictionary. In order to make the logic tree work, I created the dictionary beforehand and made all the values None. This way, if a value was never updated due to an error in the file, it would be caught and not allowed to move on. This was a problem, however, for fractal files that didn't require a 'c' value. When I parsed these files, the default 'c' value of 'None' would never get updated because it was never in the file, and this would cause the program to crash. To fix this, I had to add a conditional statement saying that if the type of the while wasn't one of the three that required the 'c' value, then the 'creal' and 'cimag' keys were to be removed. This fixed the bug, and no more programs crashed.
* I frequently ran the program without any arguments to confirm that the default Fractal and Palette were generated properly. I never had any problems with this, which was nice for a change. 


*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `tested`


## Phase 4: Deployment (tag name `5.1-deployed`)
*(5% of your effort)*

Deliver:

*   [X] Tag the last commit in this phase `deployed`
*   [X] Your repository is pushed to GitLab.
*   [X] **Verify** that your final commit was received by browsing to its project page on GitLab.
    *   Ensure the project's URL is correct.
    *   Review the project to ensure that all required files are present and in correct locations.
    *   Check that unwanted files have not been included.
    *   Make any final touches to documentation, including the Sprint Signature and this Plan.
*   [X] **Validate** that your submission is complete and correct by cloning it to a new location on your computer and re-running it.
	*	Run your program from the command line so you can see how it will behave when your grader runs it.  **Running it in PyCharm is not good enough!**
    *   Run through your test cases to avoid nasty surprises.
    *   Check that your documentation files are all present.


## Phase 5: Maintenance

Spend a few minutes writing thoughtful answers to these questions.  They are meant to make you think about the long-term consequences of choices you made in this project.

Deliver:

*   [ ] Write brief and honest answers to these questions:
    *   What parts of your program are sloppily written and hard to understand?
        *   Are there parts of your program which you aren't quite sure how/why they work?
        *   If a bug is reported in a few months, how long would it take you to find the cause?
    *   Will your documentation make sense to...
        *   ...anybody besides yourself?
        *   ...yourself in six month's time?
    *   How easy will it be to add a new feature to this program in a year?
    *   Will your program continue to work after upgrading...
        *   ...your computer's hardware?
        *   ...the operating system?
        *   ...to the next version of Python?
*   [ ] Make one final commit and push your **completed** Software Development Plan to GitLab.
*   [ ] Respond to the **Assignment Reflection Survey** on Canvas.
